Caption: hey everybody i'm ben
Caption: all right so depending on whether you
Caption: read the agenda on the little lanyard
Caption: you've got or uh read the abstract that
Caption: was posted on the website you may have
Caption: come into this talk thinking that i'm
Caption: going to say should stop testing
Caption: first one i'm going to call out is that
Caption: that's not the case
Caption: what
Caption: you can't really convey in text is that
Caption: the emphasis is on the word writing stop
Caption: writing tests so what i'm going to talk
Caption: to you about today is a way that you can
Caption: rather than writing tests by hand you
Caption: can start generating tests
Caption: before i get into it
Caption: all these sponsors come in to make today
Caption: happen uh post report one of them and
Caption: all the sponsors that's right responses
Caption: and volunteers speakers you guys
Caption: everyone's showing up without all of
Caption: those happening and today doesn't happen
Caption: so it's really good to have everybody in
Caption: the room
Caption: there's my much much larger life size
Caption: head i haven't done this on a screen
Caption: that's big before so normally i say
Caption: slightly larger
Caption: uh you can reach me on twitter or
Caption: something if you want afterwards and yes
Caption: i am a consultant telstra purple
Caption: so what's relevant for today is that i
Caption: started my life in software seven years
Caption: ago or so as a software tester
Caption: and then a few years later became a
Caption: developer and i found that the tests
Caption: that i wrote which were pretty good when
Caption: i was a tester all of a sudden were not
Caption: very good when i was a developer so
Caption: going through some of the reasons that
Caption: changed and recently i've been
Caption: reflecting on how i could make that
Caption: better and sort of buck that trend
Caption: so the trouble with testing
Caption: probably somebody in the room have seen
Caption: some of these problems uh it can be hard
Caption: to find time to write good tests
Caption: for example you've got lots of other
Caption: things you need to do you need to write
Caption: documentation you've got to actually
Caption: build the features you want to
Caption: go to sprint review meetings and all
Caption: those kind of things
Caption: so i hope that i'll help out with that
Caption: today should be quicker to write them
Caption: you also avoid main writing tests
Caption: because you don't want to have to
Caption: maintain them
Caption: especially when you're in early stages
Caption: of a product that changes a lot
Caption: and if you have to rewrite your tests
Caption: every time you change something then
Caption: either not really that useful test but
Caption: it also just contributes to people not
Caption: wanting to write them
Caption: so help with that
Caption: you might not know what to test again
Caption: will help
Caption: it can be hard to find edge cases and
Caption: and find bugs
Caption: well again i'm going to help with that
Caption: the last one is that you still end up
Caption: with bugs no matter how many tests you
Caption: write
Caption: i don't know if i'll be able to
Caption: necessarily help you with that but at
Caption: least give you some ideas and
Caption: at least you won't have to write the
Caption: test yourself so no wasted time there
Caption: so the technique i'm going to talk to
Caption: you today about is called model based
Caption: testing
Caption: anyone in the room done it before i know
Caption: at least one
Caption: and only one okay cool
Caption: so it's new for most of you
Caption: basically model-based testing allows you
Caption: to describe a system in a way the
Caption: computer will understand so that a
Caption: computer can test it for you
Caption: like all good things it starts with
Caption: three steps and the first step step one
Caption: is to create an abstract model that is
Caption: the model for the model based test
Caption: abstract model is a bit of a weird way
Caption: to phrase it
Caption: so we'll start by making the abstract
Caption: concrete with an example
Caption: we'll talk about a stopwatch imagine the
Caption: old-school stopwatch where the time that
Caption: goes around
Caption: start button the stop button but
Caption: probably the same button and then a
Caption: reset button
Caption: and we think about what states this
Caption: stopwatch could be in
Caption: so for me i've decided to model this
Caption: with a zero state which is when it's
Caption: sitting at zero
Caption: a running state when it's turning around
Caption: and a stopped state when it's not
Caption: and then you think about what you can do
Caption: to move between these different states
Caption: so in our case we've got two buttons on
Caption: the stopwatch a main button and a second
Caption: button
Caption: now we've got these states
Caption: we essentially turn it into a diagram
Caption: and draw some arrows for how it works
Caption: together
Caption: so you can see here we've got a zero
Caption: state press the main button and we end
Caption: up in a running state
Caption: the great thing about this diagram is
Caption: you can show this to other people and
Caption: figure out really early if your
Caption: assumptions are wrong
Caption: if you model the system correctly or how
Caption: it should behave
Caption: so a picture is great because you can
Caption: show that to anyone your neighbors your
Caption: uncles your nieces and nephews uh your
Caption: product owners business
Caption: analysts sorry i can remember that word
Caption: and testers anyone on your team can have
Caption: an opinion on this
Caption: a picture is worth a thousand words or
Caption: in this case it's worth a thousand tests
Caption: we talk about how we want to bring
Caption: testing
Caption: bring testing
Caption: forward and shift it left
Caption: [Music]
Caption: and
Caption: if testing is really about giving us
Caption: confidence in the products then doing it
Caption: as early as possible is the best thing
Caption: we can do
Caption: so back to our example
Caption: how does this help us write tests or not
Caption: write tests
Caption: well if we look at one in isolation you
Caption: can see we've got a zero
Caption: state which is our initial state
Caption: you press a main button which is an
Caption: action
Caption: and then a running state which is the
Caption: final state if you're familiar with like
Caption: bdd
Caption: tests or a given acceptance criteria
Caption: this is your given when then
Caption: all this diagram is is those acceptance
Caption: criteria drawn together
Caption: joined up
Caption: you can model pretty much anything as a
Caption: finite state machine it's really useful
Caption: for user interfaces because they are
Caption: state machines
Caption: they
Caption: have a state that they're in they don't
Caption: do anything until you make some action
Caption: and then they end up somewhere else
Caption: but it's not just user interfaces you
Caption: can also model your business logic and
Caption: those kind of things like if you've got
Caption: cqrs
Caption: you can fire commands and do queries to
Caption: check the results
Caption: like i said you can model your business
Caption: rules this is an order for example
Caption: you don't want these to be too complex
Caption: so
Caption: if you looked into this ready for
Caption: shipping state that's on the screen
Caption: you might think there's actually a lot
Caption: of stuff that happens in the background
Caption: but we're trying to write these tests
Caption: from the user's perspective
Caption: so ready for shipping is probably enough
Caption: for their point of view
Caption: you can model anything user interfaces
Caption: business rules or dogs
Caption: this is my dog
Caption: my dog does four things my dog sleeps my
Caption: dog is idle it eats and it's got this
Caption: thing called zoomies if anyone has a dog
Caption: they know what that is probably if you
Caption: don't it looks a bit like this
Caption: just running around randomly in circles
Caption: i don't know what causes the dog from to
Caption: go from idle to zoomies that's why i put
Caption: question marks there but i know that
Caption: once it's been in zoomies it goes
Caption: straight to bed
Caption: so one nice thing about graphs in
Caption: general is we can represent them in ways
Caption: that a computer can understand uh this
Caption: on the left
Caption: generated that on the right so it's
Caption: really weird reversing that
Caption: so this mark down on the left is a
Caption: language called mermaid if you use git
Caption: lab it's kind of built into their
Caption: brain markdown previews
Caption: if you use vs code you can get a plugin
Caption: to do it but that means you can put this
Caption: documentation in with your code
Caption: so it all stays together it's easier to
Caption: keep it in sync
Caption: another example is using a library
Caption: called xstate
Caption: i've never done on a screen this big
Caption: that's probably big enough for you to
Caption: read but if it wasn't the important bits
Caption: are here
Caption: so you start with
Caption: well you list out your states you say
Caption: in the sleeping state on the wake up
Caption: event i go to idle
Caption: and one nice thing about xstate is that
Caption: it's got a little visualizer tool where
Caption: you can click around and actually do
Caption: things which is kind of nice
Caption: that's really good to visualize and
Caption: share that
Caption: and you can just play around with it so
Caption: you can build this json object basically
Caption: and test your system make sure it works
Caption: the way you expect
Caption: so i mentioned xstate there are a couple
Caption: of other tools you can use for
Caption: model-based testing some of the more
Caption: modern ones that are kept up to date are
Caption: graphwalker which is a java library but
Caption: it's also got a visual graph like a
Caption: visual tool to edit those graphs
Caption: alt walker has a wrapper around that for
Caption: net and for python
Caption: simulator i haven't used but i know it's
Caption: a thing and x8 is probably the one i've
Caption: used the most so
Caption: my examples
Caption: use xtape but we're not really going to
Caption: talk too much about the tools today
Caption: there are a whole bunch of other ones
Caption: that are like enterprise tools or
Caption: stopped being maintained 15 years ago
Caption: kind of thing so
Caption: it's not a new concept
Caption: so step one was to create an abstract
Caption: model
Caption: step two is to help the computer out
Caption: computers are really smart but they
Caption: don't know
Caption: everything that we are trying to do they
Caption: don't know how to test the system but
Caption: once you tell them how they can do it
Caption: for you so we've got to tell the system
Caption: how to test it
Caption: in this case we need to fill in the
Caption: actions and the assertions
Caption: so you may already have a test that
Caption: looks like this where you submit a click
Caption: a submit button and then look for a
Caption: success message to appear
Caption: these are the important bits for us
Caption: you might have more in your setup i
Caption: guess but
Caption: but for us we just have the actions and
Caption: the insertions
Caption: plug them into a model
Caption: and we go from there
Caption: but it's not just clicking buttons in
Caption: the user interface that you can do
Caption: this example using curl would you call
Caption: an api and check
Caption: the results so you might
Caption: you can you can test your apis as well
Caption: as your uis
Caption: or if you want to apply your test to the
Caption: unit level then you can use your domain
Caption: models if you're doing d2d and those
Caption: kind of things
Caption: so back to our example
Caption: when we're at zero we want to make sure
Caption: that the thing is pointing straight up
Caption: we press the main button by actually
Caption: pressing the main button
Caption: and check that thing's moving around
Caption: then at some point press the main button
Caption: again it should stop
Caption: if we press the second button make sure
Caption: it's back at zero
Caption: step two is pretty easy step three is
Caption: where the fun stuff happens that's how
Caption: we generate the tests
Caption: so how do you generate tests from a
Caption: picture well you follow the arrows and
Caption: you decide when you want to stop
Caption: following the arrows is just that we've
Caption: got that picture and we'll walk through
Caption: one in a sec
Caption: but how do you decide when you want to
Caption: stop you know we could just do that
Caption: forever
Caption: realistically you'll probably want to
Caption: stop either when you've hit every state
Caption: or when you've visited every transition
Caption: but it's really up to you you can do
Caption: model based testing that runs
Caption: essentially in a random order and it
Caption: would never stop until you tell it to
Caption: so in our example we start at the top
Caption: we go to the zero state and we check
Caption: that we are at zero
Caption: then we press the main button check the
Caption: word running
Caption: press the main button again check the
Caption: where it stopped
Caption: at this point we've got two options we
Caption: could either press the main button again
Caption: and go back to running
Caption: in which case we end up in one of those
Caption: loops you could just stand forever
Caption: or we can press the second button and
Caption: check that we're back at zero
Caption: so i plugged that model into the x state
Caption: and it generated 10 tests for me without
Caption: me doing anything essentially just a bit
Caption: of code that i copy pasted
Caption: from a blog post and then you get 10
Caption: tests
Caption: but basically nothing
Caption: i wouldn't have written 10 tests for
Caption: this probably so i got better than i was
Caption: going to get
Caption: but i mentioned earlier that maintaining
Caption: tests is a bit of a burden and
Caption: change is inevitable so how do you
Caption: update these tests when things change
Caption: well if we go back to our example
Caption: some people in the room may know what i
Caption: missed
Caption: and what else have a think about it and
Caption: i'm going to go through
Caption: how
Caption: or one way that you could uncover the
Caption: gap
Caption: so if we move these from
Caption: a diagram into a table where the initial
Caption: states are on the left the actions are
Caption: along the top
Caption: then you fill in the cell with basically
Caption: what it should end up at so fill in the
Caption: ones we know from zero press the main
Caption: button and you end up in the running
Caption: state or from running pressing the main
Caption: button you end up unstopped
Caption: you can see we've got two gaps on this
Caption: table
Caption: gaps funnily enough are where the
Caption: assumptions are and where the bugs are
Caption: so
Caption: going through this process is really
Caption: useful to actually find those edge cases
Caption: and to define what the behavior should
Caption: be
Caption: in our case when we're at zero and we
Caption: press the second button which you could
Caption: also call a reset button we stay at zero
Caption: that's easy enough
Caption: but this other gap
Caption: is less obvious
Caption: if you're running and you press that
Caption: second button what should happen
Caption: uh
Caption: maybe some people have thought about
Caption: that more basically stopwatches have a
Caption: lap state where it stops actually
Caption: turning around that keeps timing
Caption: the idea is you can stop the stopwatch
Caption: right down a lap time
Caption: and then resume
Caption: so now our table is kind of full except
Caption: that it's not really because we've found
Caption: that's actually another state
Caption: so we put that at the bottom and go
Caption: through the process again
Caption: if we're in lap and we press the second
Caption: button that's the resume function so it
Caption: goes back to the running state
Caption: but what about if we press the main
Caption: button
Caption: i'm going to assume for the sake of this
Caption: exercise that it does nothing and just
Caption: stays in lap
Caption: but it's also possible that it would go
Caption: back to stopped and go to the right time
Caption: i'm not really sure
Caption: so what do we do with our diagram now
Caption: well we have to make some room and then
Caption: we have to add the lap function
Caption: now our diagrams change it means we need
Caption: to regenerate our tests
Caption: uh that's just following the arrows
Caption: again i'm not going to walk through that
Caption: but plugged into x8 and now i have 37
Caption: tests
Caption: in this case you can see at the bottom
Caption: it says resume count two and unlap count
Caption: two that's because i've let it do
Caption: two of each of those loops i think
Caption: realistically that's probably overkill
Caption: for testing the stopwatch you could have
Caption: just said one
Caption: and i think if i did that it came out
Caption: with 17 tests not 37 so maybe a bit more
Caption: manageable if you want to run that with
Caption: every build
Caption: and that's it we've got three steps
Caption: create an abstract model fill in the
Caption: assertions generate the tests question
Caption: mark question mark question mark profit
Caption: that's what we're here for right
Caption: so model-based testing comes with some
Caption: challenges
Caption: uh there's a learning curve that's a new
Caption: approach for almost everyone in the room
Caption: except for me and one guy at the back
Caption: there aren't that many tools around and
Caption: some of the ones that are a bit old um
Caption: so i went over some options that are
Caption: reasonably new and maintained
Caption: and it can be hard to get the model
Caption: right
Caption: as you saw i modeled the stopwatch and
Caption: still missed something so
Caption: i guess you got to keep that in mind my
Caption: suggestion would be to make your model
Caption: simple because they're easier to get
Caption: right you're not going to try and test
Caption: your whole application just parts of it
Caption: there's no such thing as a perfect model
Caption: there's only a useful one
Caption: but with these challenges you get a
Caption: whole bunch of benefits
Caption: i think the chief benefit among those is
Caption: that you get a better understanding of
Caption: your app and a shared understanding
Caption: because you've got this artifact in the
Caption: diagram that you can show to anyone to
Caption: build understanding
Caption: find those gaps early and prevent them
Caption: from ever getting into the product
Caption: the next one is that you get better
Caption: coverage and finding edge cases
Caption: in this sense it's not coverages and
Caption: code coverage a model based test doesn't
Caption: care how many if statements you've got
Caption: you've modeled it from the user's
Caption: perspective so you're getting the user's
Caption: perspective in terms of your coverage
Caption: and also helps you find edge cases like
Caption: we just went through
Caption: quicker to write tests because you
Caption: didn't have to write the tests
Caption: and it's really easy to make changes
Caption: you know you just update the diagram and
Caption: it all works again
Caption: so in my view model-based testing is the
Caption: logical progression from automated
Caption: testing
Caption: we started in a world
Caption: where
Caption: we had manual testing a person would
Caption: write out a script and then manually go
Caption: through those steps
Caption: then we thought actually computers are
Caption: kind of better at that they're faster at
Caption: it
Caption: so we'll still ride the test but now
Caption: we'll let a computer go through and
Caption: execute them
Caption: whereas with model based testing we let
Caption: the computer even do that step so the
Caption: computer will generate them
Caption: and then it will execute them
Caption: basically stop writing tests because
Caption: computers do it better than you can
Caption: thank you
Caption: i've also got to get repo if